They're talking to James Salter.
Let me just put this over here.
I read in your PW interview, you mentioned that you kept a journal while you were in Korea.
Yes.
But this book is recollection.
Yeah, but it doesn't mean you can't have a pony.
I mean, it's certainly not done entirely from memory because it would be quite inaccurate.
if it were.
But I thought that maybe you wanted to rely on memory.
No.
Well.
Because sometimes the things that you remember are probably the most important.
That's true.
And I did rely on memory, that is to say, to identify the things, but to render them accurately.
I used everything I could.
Letters, journal, newspapers, talking to people, whatever.
But it was the selection of things that was memory.
Do you know what I mean?
I know exactly what you mean.
I never kept notes when I was in the service, for instance, and I regret it tremendously.
That's too bad.
I've got a pretty good memory, but I've often thought, if I came to write a book about, it's a very interesting time, I would call that book, Tonkin Gulf Yacht Club, which is the patch we all wore.
It's a great title for an aircraft carrier store.
You know, I didn't keep it dry.
Well, a lot goes away from you if you don't.
And you lose a lot of very, very... Well, you lose the detail.
Yeah.
I mean, you remember certain key things, of course.
May I have some hot water in there?
Nothing more.
Just scalding water.
Thank you.
You said that your years...
in the military as a pilot were the defining years.
I don't know if that's the exact phrase that you've used.
Maybe it's the, not the defining years, but the voyage of your life.
Yes.
Well, that's a bit different.
That is a bit different.
Yeah.
Well, defining years, I would say... That was my paraphrase, which was one.
Okay.
Well, I mean, defining years, I would say, would be school years, essentially.
But after school...
you go out on the voyage, and that happened to be mine.
So who knows what defines you?
I mean, no, you're defined early, I believe, but you make refinement.
You know, there can be adjustments in it as you go along.
But the voyage of your life, could you expand a little bit on that by what you mean?
Well... Beyond the metaphor?
Not really without crushing the metaphor, but...
The voyage of my life actually refers to that tour, to the combat tour in Korea, more than to the whole business of flying.
So I volunteered to go, but I was a regular officer, and we were eager to go as pilots.
You know, it was essential in a way.
And I volunteered to go, and who knew what would happen?
So all those things happened to me that are in that particular chapter.
It's called The Singledarian Act.
The chapter title comes from Melville, as a matter of fact, from Taipei, where he talks about something or other.
The Singledarian Act had put him on the other side.
I don't remember the exact quotation.
I mean, I have it in my notebook, but not in my memory.
And the Singledarian Act refers to an act of Kastler, a guy who was in my flight, who became an ace, wonderful pilot, famous, as a matter of fact.
He won three Air Force crosses, which is the equivalent of, it's above the DSC.
No, it's the equivalent of the DSC, I believe.
That's to say the highest declaration below the Congressional Medal, and I believe the only individual ever to have done that, Kastler.
In any case...
The tour, the combat tour, was all I might have imagined and more.
And to have done it and then left, that's what I referred to as.
I had said it had been a great voyage, the voyage probably of my life.
I agree.
Actually, I think these things that happened, and also it's the event of regeneration probably.
Um, well, no.
It wasn't like the Vietnam War.
Well, I don't recall it that well.
But you see, you didn't participate in the Vietnam War.
That was after your watch.
After my watch.
But the thing is that the Korean War was overshadowed by the Second World War, which had just ended with all its tremendous, you know,
drama of every kind, and then came this remote and unpopular and, to some people, somewhat pointless war.
That was quite different, because then, after a long period, then more than ten years later,
in a period of peace.
Well, the Cold War was on, but that's not really a war.
In a period of peace came Vietnam.
I think it stood out more, and it was much longer.
Didn't Vietnam go on for about eight years, nine or ten years?
And the domestic aspect of the war was completely different than the Korean War.
I mean, it was a watershed.
in American society, and the Korean War was really not.
It was merely, you know, I don't want to say a two-for-a-penny war, because as many people were killed in Korea, almost, the casualty figures are about the same, but it wasn't.
In terms of the domestic consequences and the world consequences, but when I meant the event,
The event of your generation in which you could participate, I guess, is what I think.
Well, I was old enough to have fought in the Second War, but I didn't.
I was commissioned just as it was over.
That was really, I would say, the event, truly the event of my generation.
I didn't write about it because I wasn't in it, but I still think in terms of it.
Really?
Yes, it's inevitable.
You simply, you know, the big events of your life,
You cannot exchange for anything else at the world events.
You just can't switch and say, well, now I'm going to start thinking that it was the Kennedy assassination that was the big event of my life.
But it wasn't, because it came much later.
For me, it was totally the 60s.
I graduated high school in 61, college in 65, went to graduate school in
service from 68 to 71, 68, 68.
Everything happened to me in the 1960s.
But I believe, wouldn't it be true that that is your essential reference in life?
Absolutely.
Well, that's what I'm saying.
The Second World War, even though I didn't fight in it, was really mine.
So to use that word defining again, that almost was a defining event.
Very defining, yes.
It came during school.
School was defined in that war all at the same time.
You mentioned, and you give great credit to Joe Fox for eliciting this book out of you, but did he encourage you as to the shape that you take as recollections as opposed to a memoir?
No.
I was one of Fox's two favorites that he still had.
I mean, he had had lots of writers of importance.
I mean, he edited Capote, Philip Roth, many, you know, in the first rank.
But by the time, in the last 20 years of his life, he had a lot of successful books, of course, but among literary writers,
I was one of the two that he liked.
And the other?
Well, the other that he was tremendously fond of and thought she'd get a Nobel Prize, as a matter of fact, was Mavis Galant, the Canadian writer who lives in Paris.
Of course, she wrote a lot for him.
I wrote very little for him.
He only edited one book of mine, Turn Down Two.
You're killing him.
No.
And...
And then Wanda encouraged me to write the third.
But when it came to the third, no, he didn't say, I think you should do this or that.
He said, you write it.
No, I have confidence in it.
Well, he didn't say I have confidence in it.
He just said that.
That didn't seem to be his way to have confidence in it.
Martin Cruz Smith was, of course, his author, too.
Well, I didn't call him a literary.
I mean, he is.
I suppose he is, really.
He's sort of on that book alone.
He's not a literary.
But he writes a very high-level, well, you know what I mean.
I know precisely what you mean.
By literary author, I mean a respected writer who doesn't sell any books.
Yeah, well...
That's funny.
You did say to some... Cruise sells a lot, yes.
You did say to someone that you're tired of being called a writer's writer.
Well, I don't know why.
I mean, that's... But everybody certainly has the greatest respect for you.
Well, but I mean, the critics and people who interviews her and so forth go back to the file, so to speak, and they say, ah, writer's writer.
Well...
and they pick it up.
I think that's the way it happens.
Did you know Richard Yates, who lived around here in Boston?
No.
Did you know his work at all?
A bit.
Yeah.
He had Revolutionary Road.
Revolutionary Road, 11 Kinds of Loneliness.
I remember talking with Dick Yates right over at the Crossroads, a bar that he liked over there.
over there, actually, that's Boston over there.
And he said, if I knew how to write, believe me, if I knew how to write a bestseller, I would do it tonight.
Of course.
And, you know, he said, but I can only write the way I know how to write.
Do you subscribe to that?
Oh, sure.
I mean, I think that's self-evident.
You know, I think it was Jules Renard who said, if I'm going to translate the French, roughly, he said, you can...
tell stories as you like, anecdotes, stories.
You can entertain as you like, but you cannot write as you like.
You can only write what you are.
That's great.
And I think that's essentially true.
And the rest of this, once again, is it?
Jules Renard, R-E-N-A-R-D.
Go ahead.
I interrupted you.
You were going to say something.
I'm sorry.
I think he said, on peut compter comme on veut, or something like that.
On peut pas écrire comme on veut, on peut écrire ce que on est, or what you are.
My French is probably lousy.
I'm going to have a ball transcribing that one.
Well, no, no.
Don't, because the French is all wrong, I'm sure.
Well, yeah, but I mean, you hear this story all the time.
In fact...
I'm sure this happens to every writer because I can remember having dinner with Fox saying, Christ, I could write a book like that.
I said, he said, you couldn't possibly.
He said, you have to believe in that to be able to write it when you don't.
And I think that's true.
I agree with that, actually.
For the longest time, you resisted.
allowing the first two books to be reissued.
I guess in the first book, finally, you're... Could you tell me why that is, and then what prompted you to change your... Well, I didn't think it was worthy of being reissued, it seemed to me.
I wouldn't call it an insult to the public, but there are plenty of books out there, and it was the first book, useful in many ways.
And although I thought the story was good, I didn't think the writing was measured up to what... I didn't really learn to write to my third book.
And this was the first one.
But the former editor-in-chief of North Point, Jack Shoemaker, a man I have a tremendous amount of respect for, kept after me and said, no, you're being too hard on yourself.
That's not true.
It is an awfully good book.
I know it is.
And I finally agreed to...
having published it, he would let me revise it to take out some of the worst.
So you did go, so this was, you're anticipating my question here.
Go ahead.
This is very interesting.
Well, to take out the inadvertencies or what I thought were, you know, baby fat, let us say.
And so I did the best I could, and he reissued it.
I have been astonished.
at what happened.
You know, first of all, it's the republication of a book.
It's not a new book, of course.
But you tinkered with it, though?
I tinkered with it.
He got a lot of reviews.
It got front-page reviews in certain places.
It's in its third printing now.
Does this astonish you?
Yes, of course, and it's probably going to go into a fourth or fifth.
Isn't that great?
That's wonderful.
Yes, of course it's wonderful, but it makes me feel a bit foolish because I said never in a hundred years, but I was quite wrong.
Do you think maybe you're too self-critical about your work?
Yes, I am, but there I didn't think I was wrong, but I guess I was.
You know what Mencken said, gentlemen, I was mistaken.
But Galileo was the one who said, look, I'll say I'm sorry, but...
but the planets still go around the sun.
You know, sometimes it's self-evident.
So clearly, I've interviewed authors before, and it's an interesting concept to me.
Do you consider completed work completed work as work?
You know, it was your first novel.
You've even gone so far as to suggest it was Juvenalia.
and maybe it should be taken in that context.
What prompts you at this point in your life to want to go back and tinker with something that you wrote 40-odd years ago?
Well, I say I was persuaded by an editor.
But to tinker with it.
Well, I didn't want to let it go as it had been.
Certain things I knew were wrong with it, and I changed them.
He wanted me to write a preface for it to explain.
Not to explain, but to...
helped the reader a bit.
And I did.
And I thought, he wasn't the only one.
The book had, I don't want to say a cult following, because even the word cult makes it sound too numerous.
But I have had letters over the years, letters over the years saying, would you mind if I Xerox several copies of it, because people and so forth.
And then in France, I had a call from, there's a French writer, perhaps you've heard of him, named...
Pierre Klosterman.
He wrote a book right after, bestseller, quite an educated man and a good writer.
He was a fighter pilot in the Second War, and he wrote a book called The Big Circus.
I know that.
Well, it was a big, it was a huge success.
Klosterman went on to write seven or eight other books.
He became a deputy to the assembly.
He's a head of, I don't know, international fishing.
I don't know.
He's a man of many, you know, accomplishments.
He called me.
one day and said uh and he speaks english of course quite well and he said well you know i your book is ever published here i would love to write a forward for it this was before it was reissued in america so you know these things add up and you begin to say i'm not as smart perhaps i'm not as good a judge of these things as i thought so
Tim O'Brien who wrote Going After Cacciato, which is the Vietnam book, and I did interview him in fact writing this building with him, his most recent book.
Again, the Vietnam War is seared, I mean, his experiences.
But he has very quietly gone back and fooled around with Cacciato.
It was a book that won the National Booking Award.
In fact, he said he got a letter from a teacher who was in a course, and he was reading the hardcover.
And the students were reading the paperback, and they were saying, we're not reading the same, you know, we're not reading the same book, because he had made changes very quietly.
And I said, Tim, don't you feel that this book represents where you were, what you were at that point in your life?
And I guess I'm asking you the same question.
Oh, but that's making a monument of that.
He said, my responsibility is to make the best work of art that I can.
He said, that's what I feel.
And, you know, so I guess we're all entitled to different opinions on it.
Yeah, well, I wouldn't call, I wouldn't use the term work of art myself.
But, no, no, I agree with O'Brien.
that if it can be improved, and you have the opportunity.
I mean, it's not like Bonnard, who was known for carrying a little tin of paints in his jacket, and when he went to the home of a collector and happened to see one of his paintings, he was not above going up and making some... Oh, that's wonderful.
No, that's true.
Oh, yeah, quite true.
I might use that.
Well, it's exactly what O'Brien did, and in a sense what I did.
as well, yes.
So, no, why not?
Well, when Henry James was bringing out the New York edition of his works, he was just supposed to be writing prefaces, and he's going in there, and he's fooling around.
Well, I think he wanted to do that.
I mean... That's interesting, you know.
You get a lot of opposite views on that from other novelists, you know.
What would be the...
The completed work is completed work, and why go back to something that you finished?
Why not go ahead and do something new?
This represents who I was at that point in my life and at that stage of my development.
Well, that's a very self-important attitude, really.
Perhaps that's okay in the case of a Leonardo, but in lesser cases, I would say the book is the primary thing and not what it represents historically.
If the book can be made...
a little bit more interesting, I wouldn't hesitate to do that.
I mean, there's a limit, I think, to tinkering.
You finally abandon these things, isn't that right?
I mean, you reach a certain point and you say, that's as much, that's as good as I can make it.
Or as good as I want to make it, one or the other.
Well, okay.
Because sometimes you say, I've had it.
Yes, yes.
Well, you may lose heart in a way.
But it depends how tenacious you are or how important the work is.
I mean, you can't do that with a newspaper column, obviously, but if it's a book, you may stick at it, stay at it longer.
I know with my book I was tinkering, tinkering, tinkering up until the day the thing went off and they ordered me not to call them anymore.
Well, I think that's true.
Because we've had six plittings, I've actually been able to go in and fix things.
And I don't hesitate.
This is a work of non-fiction, not an album.
Well, I am going to make some changes in the paperback edition.
Yes, and I'm making some changes.
Substantive ones?
No.
I mean, well, they're substantive to me.
Probably unnoticeable to the average reader, but things that I think... Well, stylistic in the writing, or things that you're going to add in terms of... No, I'm going to add a little bit and change just a word or two.
Everything counts.
you know, even in a long book.
Do you give readings?
Oh, yeah.
Have you ever attempted to change things as you're reading?
I do.
Do you?
Oh, sure.
And depending what the audience looks like also, you may leave out a word or make a contraction or one thing or another.
Yeah, very interesting.
Excuse me, I hope you don't mind going off.
I grew up on lentil soup, too, by the way.
I happen to say my mother made wonderful lentil soup when I was there.
Oh, do I mention lentil soup?
Oh, my grandmother.
My grandmother made it, yeah.
It wasn't really that good.
But I was a kid.
You remember it with affection, though.
Well, I was a kid and didn't know any better.
It was very clear.
a lentil soup i bet you know you can see i thought that was more greek well dark yes dark and there was sometimes with carrots you described learning are you a product of your reading would you say have you been shaped by the books that you've read you talk about learning sex from books for instance from a family yeah very early on yeah and to expand that
The reason I ask the question is very selfish.
A chapter in my new book is I'm really fascinated by people who can really palpably
shaped by the books that they've read.
Well, Virginia Woolf never went to school, you know, and everything she became for the reading.
Shaw read at the British Library at his university, you know.
Well, I mean, I think that's quite true.
Probably the finest education, not technical, of course, but the finest liberal education would come from reading because...
The books will tell you things that you're not going to learn any other way, and tell you in terms that are marvelous, that just don't, are not so clarified in life, not so, you know, you cannot... So I would say the answer is yes.
But there's another part to the, I mean, another aspect to the question,
Which is, would you have been different?
Have they changed your character, so to speak?
I don't believe they do that.
I believe they broaden you.
They change your soul, but not your character.
That's excellent.
Because I think in your case, your writing really does reflect your experience.
More so, perhaps, even... Here, you mean, or everywhere?
Everywhere.
Well... Your books have reflected the things that have happened in your life from when it's... Well, to some extent, I mean, they're not all autobiographical by any means.
No, but they certainly are influenced by the things that you... That I've seen and done, yes.
But that's the power of fiction, of course, to create something fictional.
That you haven't seen or experienced, in a way?
You know, I...
I'm teaching writing now in this stint at Williams first semester.
I've done it a couple times before at Iowa, actually.
And you were obliged to rethink these things all the time in addressing students and addressing these problems.
I believe in whoever it was that says your job is to invent the truth.
it's not a question of making things up that phrase bothers me a bit i it's true you may be writing down things that haven't happened but they better be the truth despite that and that's what makes a great uh i think a great book or the book the kind of book i like in any case and not only me i would say that that identifies many of the works that we consider
uh you know worth reading enduring so uh they are true but uh hey i i don't want you to talk about reviews uh the reviews have been wonderful on this book but i noticed how they they generally coach and say well this is a book about the male experience have you seen these reviews somewhere like that yeah what's your response to that true
I would say that has a little bit of current fashion and PC-ism and so forth.
Yeah, because I know that the viewer is almost apologizing that he hasn't liked it because it is taking the position of a white, middle-aged guy in the late 20th century.
essentially the most popular people.
Yeah, well, all right, but male sexuality and male issues and these kinds of things.
It's like you have to apologize.
Well, they do.
They are apologetic or a little grudging or a little nervous about liking it too much for fear they'll be attacked from the radical, whatever, left or right.
I don't think that's anything to worry about.
I mean, men's affection for women, such as it is, that's not going to change, no matter what customs dictate at the moment.
I don't think the attitudes in the book are at all a question of my generation.
I think that they are absolutely valid, and...
I'm not concerned about that.
I could be completely wrong.
I was wrong about the hunters.
I could be completely wrong about this, but I don't think so.
I don't think so either, because people are leading it with great pleasure.
The writing is beautiful, and I can see why it took 10 years to write it.
Well, it shouldn't.
It represents really like two and a half years' work, but I'm slow.
Another guy could have
done it probably in a couple of years.
But you had other things to do, right?
I did.
I was trying to earn a little money and teach and I had a kid and I don't know what happens.
I've never completely given up living is the problem.
You haven't really talked about Hollywood and screenwriting and stuff like that.
You've been very critical about your own
I guess you've been quoted as saying there's only one screenplay that you really feel achieved it.
Well, came close to achieving it, I would say.
I suppose it's my nature.
I mean, when something is really good, I usually don't talk about it.
I just let it be.
If it's not quite good, I'm willing to admit that it was my fault or that it could be better.
It didn't make it.
I suppose that's what it amounts to.
Movies are, you know this, and most educated moviegoers, I would think, know this.
They depend so much on the cast and the director, apart from the writer.
The writer is only the initial, you know, the father of it, let us say, in a way.
The producer would claim to be the father.
Actually, the writer provides the, you know, the text for it.
But after that, it's in a lot of other hands that have nothing to do with the writer.
So good scripts are ruined sometimes.
No, that's fine.
Good scripts are ruined by bad luck in casting or by the wrong director and maybe other things as well.
And I would say that I had, my luck wasn't great in film writing.
I can think of a script or maybe a script and a half that would have been much better if it had, would have been good if it had the right people, but it didn't.
And that happens.
You've got to accept that.
Did you feel any kind of a proprietary way about your scripts as you do about your novels?
No, not quite, but I was quite serious about it.
I mean, I did my, I gave them whatever I had to give them.
It wasn't a question of
doing it with my left hand or with my fingers crossed and saying, well, this is nothing but a movie.
So you gave me a shot.
Yes, I did it the way you write a column.
You do the best you can.
And so, no, I didn't approach it cynically and say, well, what's the difference?
It's only a movie, and what do all those unwashed people?
No.
But it doesn't always come out.
I don't, those are the breaks.
I don't, you know, it's partly my fault, partly luck, all those things.
How many films did Faulkner have produced, I wonder?
Did William Faulkner have produced that he did and basically supported him?
Yes, well I know at least one that he wrote, something about the pharaohs, I can't remember.
But other than that, you know,
Yeah.
Well, did you enjoy that work?
Oh, yes.
I think you enjoyed it, especially at the beginning, in the early part of doing it.
It's very exciting.
It's very exciting to have everybody suddenly assuring you that you are quite an important figure and waiting eagerly.
for what you produce.
And then this, you're more than on the fringe, you're meeting a lot of people traveling, the hotels, this and that.
You said earlier in our conversation that, jokingly, but a literary writer is a writer whose books don't sell.
But Jim, but take that half seriously.
Do you think
What is your attitude on the future of serious literature, of literature, of literary novels?
Well, I think overall I would say literature has declined a bit in importance in our culture, in our world.
Will it continue to slip?
I don't know.
Is it a bad thing?
I don't really know.
I think you have to accept it, as you accept change in the seashore or something.
It happened.
Everything that has happened in the second half of the century, technologically, has made a big difference.
And some things that happened in the first half, film for instance, have made a difference.
It's wonderful.
It's like driving in a taxi cab and arguing with the cab driver about whether the baseball team, about what they should have done or not, and is it good or not.
Nobody really knows.
The novel Dead, I wouldn't say that.
Less important than it was when Thackeray was writing, or Henry James.
who was incidentally not one of the most popular writers in his generation.
Or Melville for that matter.
No, I mean, but less important than that?
Yes, probably.
Somebody pointed out Margaret Drabble, I didn't interview with her a couple of years ago.
The fact is, you think of the great Russian novelists, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Reunion, they wrote these wonderful novels at a time when the vast majority of the Russian people couldn't read.
And yet, the literature was still produced, so whether or not, you know, there's a decline in literacy or interest or whatever,
It doesn't necessarily mean that the literature will not be produced.
That's true.
And, of course, the literature is carried on by a small minority of people in any case.
In any case.
I think so.
I mean, by academics, by avid readers, by people, book lovers.
So, I don't, it's hard to say.
There seems to be less time to read these days than there was in life.
That's a good point.
But having said all this, do you write with a certain reader in mind?
Well, I write things that I would like to read.
I write things for myself, first of all, that I enjoy reading.
And secondly, I guess I write with a couple of people in mind.
a couple of type of people in mind that I would like, that I can imagine in reading it.
That's all.
If we could, again, discuss why you decided to do a volume of Recollections, and as you say, written...
about certain things, the rest have been now written.
You know, you're basically being very selective about what you're going to write about.
In some other place, I said I was actually was writing light years.
I remember I was... I had in mind something Jean Renoir had said when he said, the only things that are important in life are the things you remember.
That's a charming aphorism, and it's like a mebius.
Is it a mebius strip?
What is that thing where you go inside and outside on the piece of paper as you follow it?
Because it's self-defining in a way.
Of course, if you don't remember it, of what importance can it be?
But at the same time, I think he meant something else.
I think he meant those things.
The only things that are important are the things that are embedded.
in your heart and in your soul since they happened or you heard them or whatever and it was those things that i was i was looking for things that had really shaped me or that i was afraid would shape me and leaving out a lot of the rest i didn't want to write a book such as everybody else had written only out of this
I would say, perhaps unwise idea of doing original things.
And so that's the way I wrote it.
I mean, I could write another book just like it and tell a lot of things.
that aren't in this, and maybe it would be just as interesting, but I don't believe I'm going to do it once is enough.
The book also only goes up to about 1975, 1980.
I mean, it stops almost 20 years ago.
So there is room
For more?
You mean volume two?
Tell your readers not to be apprehensive.
But this book, I bet it's doing very well commercially.
Do you think it is?
Well, for me, it is.
Do you think that maybe more people will get to know you through your recollections than they might have say through your novels?
Oh, unquestionably.
Yes.
that's going to do that.
Whether it will... I mean, yes, and you sell backless books, that is to say, earlier books, in greater number because of that.
I don't know.
It's not going to be a tidal wave.
This is a time when all these other memoirs are coming out.
This is a nice book.
I don't know if that's good or bad, but you're not going into this confessional stuff either.
It just seems to be the stuff that's working these days.
You know, you write the book, as I said, that you would like to read.
I haven't asked you things that you discuss on the book.
I mean, that's my job to read that.
It seems silly to go over things.
Well, whatever you like.
I have to say that Irwin Shaw was...
I wish he had left half a dozen books that we could have read after he left us.
Oh, really?
You liked him a lot?
Very much, yeah.
Well, I'm somewhat circumspect about the literary aspects of Erwin.
It's really the manly, it's really his character, his persona.
It's very entertaining, though, I would have to say.
He or his writing?
His writing.
I didn't hear it.
Well, of course, his original story, the one that made him famous, I see is still anthologized all the time.
His other books seem to be, I don't know.
At college, when you read the course outlines and you listen to academics, and a lot of reputations are, I would not say forged, but certainly finished off in a way and in half,
by what is being taught, because these students come in, you know, they don't have their roots, cultural roots, don't go very deep.
They haven't all read the same things as they might have 50 years ago.
In fact, they are less well-read than my contemporaries were.
and as you see what the academics are teaching you get an idea of who is who is being endorsed and who's being approved validated is the perfect word which writers are being validated and those validated writers are in a better position to be read later but that's not the final vote of course that
We don't know where that boat is made or how it's made.
Something else happens, but that's part of it.
And Erwin Shaw, I mean, is not one of those.
No, 20 years from now, I don't imagine that many people are going to know who he was.
I am afraid.
that might happen uh well it might uh he was a very good writer and a and an extraordinary uh figure i think and i uh yeah i was very uh i don't want to say he made a man of me but uh
He gave you a lot of ideas of what one could be.
Yeah, I admired him tremendously.
Well, that's evident.
Perhaps it's too evident.
I probably should have modified that.
Well, we talk about canonical stuff, though.
Again, I was talking with Margaret Travel two days ago.
She is, by coincidence, the editor of the Oxford Companion to English Literature, because she's kind of in a position to decide who's in and who's out in a very fine way.
And so I said, well, you know, she's starting in January to do a new one.
Who's in?
She said, well, nobody reads Sir Walter Raleigh anymore.
Nobody, but he's in.
He stays in because he has to be in.
She said, nobody reads The Fairy Queen anymore, but that stays in.
But this is interesting, actually.
Isn't that interesting?
Yeah, this is what I talk about with my wife.
I wouldn't bore anybody at dinner.
But yes, it is tremendously interesting.
There are works, yes, like The Fairy Queen, that have to be in, even though they're unread.
I'm teaching Jane Austen at the moment.
I could write a Jane Austen book, I really could, because it is so simple.
And I could write as good a book, in a way, as she has written, but it wouldn't be any good because it wasn't done by Jane Austen at the time.
That's right.
It has to be.
You know, it made me think, for instance, of Gates.
I don't know what his house is like, but I imagine from reading these vague reports that he can summon upon the walls and these marvelous screens any painting from, you know, hundreds or even thousands.
that he has the rights to, and perhaps with definition that is so beautiful that it's more brilliant perhaps than even the original painting is because it's, you know, reproduced digitally.
I'm writing about this, by the way.
Well, so he can do all this, right?
But at the same time, that's a wonderful illustration.
Graphically, it's going to be overwhelming to see that.
but it's not the painting, and it doesn't have the soul.
I don't like to use that word again, but it doesn't have some quality that the painting has that is inimitable, and you have to have the painting to have that.
Nothing else replaces it.
Well, that's like the Jane Austen book.
I mean, yes, you can write it, but it's not going to do you any good.
Nobody's going to read it, even though it's better than Jane Austen, and it won't be better than her inferior
version of it is, because she didn't write it.
You understand what I... I'm writing about this whole concept of text, and what is it about the actual book?
You know, it is relevant to this whole computer technology where they're scanning things.
It's paradoxical, but it's there.
I mean, you know, it's a question.
The world and life are too... I like Saul Bellow's line, in the end, he has some old man dying.
Or maybe he just said this.
And the father says to his son, one of his final comments is...
I just, when it ends, I want to turn it on the other side.
That's all I am.
We should just do one side, because otherwise you're going to be transcribing this damn thing for months.
Don't worry about it.
That's my problem.
Go ahead.
So Bellows, the guy says to his sonnesty's time, you know, I never figured it out.
And in a sense, life is like that.
The further you go...
the more difficult it is to make everything out.
When you're young, you don't have that problem, of course, because everything is different.
But later on, you begin to have it.
Well, I think it's unworthy of writers.
I'm quoting someone here, maybe Gide, I don't remember, who said it's unworthy of noble natures to spread around them the confusion they feel.
And I think that's especially true as writers mature, because then...
you begin to say, well, I'm losing that single point of view.
I did interview with Stephen Jay Gould, you probably know over at Harvard.
He told me an interesting story that they actually, somebody built a total scale, a perfect reproduction of the spirit of St.
Louis.
Yes.
But nobody, and it looked precisely like Lindbergh's aircraft, but nobody wanted to have their picture taken next to it.
That's exactly what I'm talking about.
It is exactly, because it's not the spirit of St.
Louis.
Exactly.
And I think that's what you're saying.
Yes, yes.
I mean, we understand it, but it's inexplicable.
It's indefinable in a certain way, unprovable.
It's rather like flipping a coin, right?
You know that if you flip a coin and it turns out 18 times heads,
that the odds of the tails are much greater, but at the same time you know that the odds are only 50-50 on the next... Yeah, but it doesn't make sense.
It's hard to hold those ideas in opposition, you know, in your mind at the same time, but they're both true for some reason.
Well, that's like this whole question.
There are a lot of things that are in opposition.
You know what, I think I've...
consumed a lot of your time here what happened we have to go well i think you might have don't you have a signing tonight no i have a dinner what time is your dinner i forget but there's certainly come and find me okay all i have to do is put a tie on but the dinner can't be at six no but it's i just want to alert you to the fact that it's ten minutes to six so a couple more minutes and then you can go i'm i'm i'm enjoying this but i don't want to uh
No, no, I'll be all right.
I'm sure I'll be all right.
But that's, again, going back to travel, I said, I'll ask you this question.
Does literature have to be relevant?
Relevant to what?
Well, you mentioned that, you know, and I use the word validate for a novel, for a work, a writer, to be validated in the academy particularly.
The argument today is from whatever faction you want to name, is the work relevant?
Is Shakespeare relevant?
People actually ask that question.
What a stupid question.
People say it.
Who?
Tell me.
Who says such a thing?
Read Harold Bloom's book on the Western canon.
He, of course, is the great defender of the Western canon.
But Shakespeare, I would think, needs very few defenders, even against these idiots.
Well, you're out at Williams College, Amherst College, just a couple of years ago, graduated a student, summa cum laude, English major, who had never taken a course in Shakespeare.
Well, that's possible, of course.
I mean, the fact that you can actually get a degree in English without ever having been required to study Shakespeare.
Oh, I'm not surprised at that.
Well, yes, but I mean, curricula have changed.
I mean, you know, I have kids who had to take a course.
You have to choose from A, B, C, and D, and so forth.
They take a course in tap dancing in Chicago in the 20s or something.
That counts as, you know.
Yeah, I don't think that means anything.
That's just the way schools are conducted now.
Listen, this is a very slow grinding process that I don't think you can get overly excited about at any time.
We don't even know which way it's going, really.
You know, we're like ants on a log.
What specifically is a very slow grinding process?
Oh, this whole question of culture and what is going to endure and which way we're going and how it's being formed.
I mean, yes, of course there are people shouting in the streets everywhere telling you,
what's happening, but I'd be cautious about believing in any one of them.
Do you mind if I use some of these quotes in this new book I'm working on, by the way?
I have a chapter.
Well, if they're worthy, don't use them if they're stupid.
I've been using these interviews as an opportunity to talk about matters that
interesting to me also for this book.
I am interested in this whole concept of texts, you know, because really, what is... I was at the Nobel Library, so I'd have to have this... No, but Farrell thought he should have it, definitely.
He was canvassing his fellow writers to recommend him, and I know Chandler thought he should have it.
Chandler?
Raymond Chandler.
Yeah, but he thought he should have got the Nobel Prize.
Well, he did.
I don't know.
He was very educated.
I like Chandler, but he was kind of very... Well, they get... These fellas get a little... I don't know what to say.
But I don't want to mention names here because the thing is on, but we certainly... I can certainly... A name like this might be interesting.
Okay.
There you go.
This is not a good pen.
It's stakes, but I have one of which I left at home.
Well, I hand-scratched in there.
What's your address so I can send you a copy of this piece?
It's going to be worth nothing.
In this book, I seem to have signed virtually every copy that's been sold of it.
I can't believe that.
What was the first printing of it?
It's about...
25 or 30,000 copies.
For me, you say?
Yeah, for anybody.
That's a nice first printing.
Oh, very big for me.
I mean, I had never had a first printing.
I had never had a total sale of half of that.
So they thought it would do very well.
And it is.
Yes.
That's excellent.
It depends now, I suppose, on what word of mouth is we're
If somebody says to somebody else, I really like this.
Yeah, well, I'll get it in 25 papers.
Where people buy books, which is great.
I mean, Columbus might be a lousy city.
I'm in Toledo, too, by the way.
Toledo's an interesting place.
It's right across the river from where Dreiser wrote Sister Carrie, Ma Me.
Exactly right.
The house is still there.
And then Grand Rapids.
Did I mention Grand Rapids?
No.
And then you have Allentown, PA.
I went to a wedding there, my roommate's wedding.
You mentioned something about Allentown when you were flying for it.
Flying over Allentown.
Anything I can get for an angle.
Exactly.
The book features Allentown.
There's no paper in Great Garrington tonight, I think.
Too bad.
There is one there, actually.
they published a uh something rather recently about it let me say that the flight stuff is the best uh well i love blind stuff that's you must have known that that was wonderful well i did the best i could yeah that's yeah that captures it i think anyone who's ever been
taken by uh that experience do you still fly by the way no i mean not as a pilot well you have to i don't have the time to devote to it you can't just do it like playing around with golf once a month i have a private license which i haven't exercised in 20 years because i was only flying six times four or five times a year and i was too dangerous and i was becoming dangerous yeah very dangerous young children i didn't want to you know make them an orphan no
You've got to.
It has to be something you have the time for.
I have the time, and I do it often, and so I just didn't, but I loved it.
Oh, it's, right.
Enough said.
Well, I remember it very clearly, naturally.
I think we have plenty of stuff, sir.